How do we pronounce your name?
Ishiguro, right?
Yeah, that's good.
Thank you.
I hope that I brought you to sign.
People have been calling this Kafkaesque.
Do you agree with that characterization?
I think it's slightly superficial to me.
I can understand people saying that.
It reminds me of when I published my early novels that were set in Japan and people pulled out things like kawabata and mishira simply because these were the only writers they could think of in the Japanese context.
And although I thought at the time that I had very, very little in common in a literary sense with these people, these people can't get them mentioned in reviews.
And I think this is kind of what's happening now in a slightly different way.
I've written a book that is outside of a kind of a normal, realistic tradition.
And I think people need to just pull out, once again, two or three names they can think of of writers who
other writers who have written outside of that tradition.
Although there isn't a kind of a huge, in a literary sense, I don't feel that I have a great good in common, certainly not in terms of theme.
I can understand the Kafka comparison in terms of that sort of rather dreamlike atmosphere.
Kafka certainly has that.
We need more than that.
Well, I think the other thing is that it's set somewhere in Europe, somewhere in Central Europe.
If it's been set in the United States or in England, possibly people wouldn't have reached for that.
Have you ever read Kennedy's Auto Decay, which is set in a base?
No, no, I haven't.
I've often thought about reading that.
I read, what's it called, The Clay of the Eyes, his autobiography, something extremely earnest young writer.
That could have been described also in the same kind of case.
But I've seen it in a couple of reviews, and I think some people, of course, does it bother you also that while many of your critics are loving this book,
Several also confess that they don't quite understand.
Oh, several are hating it, they do, I think.
This seems to have divided the critics.
I haven't seen many of the... Somebody told me last night that the review in the Boston Times wasn't a favourable one either.
I think it's dividing.
I haven't actually heard a chance to see the... I've seen some of the New York ones.
The New York Times started off as very interesting.
It started off very negative, but then at the very end... Well, yeah, it was kind of a... It went to work apart.
Yeah, well, I think that was just a clever piece of writing.
He just wanted to grab the attention.
Just...
Yeah, I got a big shock when I read the first paragraph, but then the second paragraph he says, I'm a remarkable genius.
But the kicker, we call the kicker, it's a work of art, you know, it's a masterpiece.
Well, to be honest, I read that thing at around 2 a.m.
I read it last night about 1 a.m.
It was very frustrating.
I got into this car on whenever it was, I was in New York, the night before last.
with my people from my publishing house at around sometime in the evening, being driven to do the Charlie Rose Show and then straight on to do a reading.
And that's when they handed it to me.
And so I didn't really get a chance to look at it.
It was very frustrating.
I kept wanting to read it, but I had all these things to go through.
And I saw that it's got the cover.
I kind of peeked at the open and thought, Jesus.
And they weren't saying anything about it.
I think they were just kind of saying again with me.
And I was saying, well, you read it.
It's a funny thing.
Really?
Yeah, it's very strange.
How do you respond to reviews?
Do you have a thin skin or do you kind of accept it as one of the immoluments of the profession, so to speak?
Yeah, I don't have a lot of thin skin about this.
I think it's partly the effect of having had a lot of praise.
um for particularly for that part that you develop a certain distance from from the thing i mean you can obviously you feel you can afford to upset a few people or whatever but having said that you know i think it's very important to pay attention to reviews yeah i don't think it's important i don't mean it's important in the sense that you know somebody
There's somebody somewhere in Philadelphia who says you must do A, B, and C, and you go away and do A, B, and C. But I feel I am in this relatively fortunate position as a writer in that if I write a book like this one, and I get a whole lot of reviews coming out of different literary cultures.
if there is some kind of local thing going on, if there's something peculiar happening on the scene of some place at some particular time that accounts for a particular recurring point, or if there is some sort of resentment that's built up between me and a particular bunch of critics or whatever, this kind of gets ironed out because you see reviews from other places.
And so, for me, I think it's...
I think it's a very important thing to see the reviews, try to see it as a whole, to try and gauge what has been received by the readers.
It's more or less one of the vital signs of one way to find out whether or not you're successful.
I think so.
I mean, then you have the decision of what to do about it afterwards.
I think even for people with serious literary aspirations,
there is in some sense there's this idea that the customer can't be wrong i mean because after all you're trying to communicate with other people as a you know you're not a short order cook either well i think that i think this is where the this is where the position comes from yeah if you are if you are a short order cook then if the customer says you know this tastes horrible then you have to go back and change it right okay
I mean, it's difficult for a cook to say, well, he doesn't like it, but I believe this is the right way to do eggs.
You know, I just keep doing it, and maybe one day the customers will come to understand my way of doing eggs, and this will be the way to do eggs.
And we'll like it.
Yeah, and we'll like it, and this will become, you know, everybody else will start doing eggs this way.
He doesn't do that, but, you know, obviously a writer...
has that decision to make.
And it's a very difficult one if there seems to be some sort of contemporary consensus.
Whether you actually do something about it, or whether you actually decide, no, even though there seems to be a consensus that I should do this or do that, I would go my own way.
I think that's always a very difficult decision for any
artist or writer to make because you have to distinguish between egotism and big headedness and on the one hand a rather flabby tendency to compromise and just please in a superficial sense on the others.
You said that book and you were pointing to the remains of the day.
Did you feel any, because of the extraordinarily success of the book, did you feel any kind of, it was your third book, it wasn't your first one, but did you feel any kind of unusual pressure to really rise to a higher level?
I mean, I let you try to do that every time out, but what were the expectations and did you feel any pressure?
Was there any anxiety?
It was quite a complicated thing because, I mean, the book was both, I suppose you called it both a commercial and a
kind of a critical success, which is a wonderful combination.
It's a wonderful combination, but the result is I think the pressures are quite complicated.
In other words, they're almost conflicting pressures.
On the one hand there is the pressure to produce a book that will once again appear to a wide audience, that could be turned into a movie by Columbia Pictures.
I think that might be impossible.
Do you agree with that?
I think that's a fairly safe starting position.
But somebody might have a go at it, but I think I'd be surprised if it was anywhere from Hollywood or Merchant Ivory.
I didn't mean to interrupt you trying to find it, but go back.
Well, yes, as you say, critical praise and commercial success.
It's a nice combination, but
Following your question about what kind of pressure does it put on you, my experience is that I think it puts two completely different sets of pressures on you.
One makes you want to follow up the commercial success.
I'm not just talking purely in terms of royalties.
You become aware that there's a whole lot of people out there who like your book.
A readership that you didn't have prior to that book, and that has done the strength of this one, may be persuaded to buy this without any...
Absolutely.
And also the film actually created a new readership as well.
They published these tie-in editions, and so was almost in May again, as a result of that.
And so I was very aware that there were a lot of people out there who perhaps genuinely liked The Remains of the Day, who perhaps weren't, in some sense, were not my natural constituency, but there they were.
So on the one hand, I felt, well,
Should I be addressing them?
Should I write a book that they would definitely enjoy?
On the other hand, I suppose the critical side of the success makes me artistically very ambitious.
I feel I should really go for it in a more artistic sense and try and actually push
push out myself, move on into territories I haven't worked in before, and try to do something new.
And in that latter respect, I felt there's not so much pressure as just encouragement.
In fact, if you have a lot of praise, then I think you feel more confident to take risks.
It seems to me, I know you personally, but what I've read, is that
You do this anyway.
I mean, you are trying to, I think, achieve, to reach for a new... You've set new goals for yourself each time and a half anyway.
I mean, in each book, it is important for you, I sense, to be different and to explore new areas anyway.
Yeah, well, that's so, but I think that's just to keep myself... Myself busy.
I mean, it's... I find it's quite a...
I don't know what you find.
I know you just published a book, don't you, about the bibliophilia or something.
Yeah, I mean, you know very well that you can't really, you know, work on a book with any passion unless you're really interested in a subject.
And it's not just that I kind of push myself.
I mean, I just wouldn't be able to sit down and devote a lot of energy to something that
that didn't really excite me.
And going over the same ground too much, or doing something that I don't really want to do, but that I feel, you know, some abstract market out there might wish to consume, I mean, it just wouldn't interest me enough, and ultimately I wouldn't do it very well for that reason.
You mentioned earlier responding to the twin pressures of commercial success and literary critical acclaim, but that you were mindful of this new audience.
Are you mindful of your reader when you're writing a work or a picture?
Do you have a certain reader in mind?
Are you your primary reader?
I don't have a conscious... I know that some writers actually do this.
It's almost like an exercise.
They actually have a little... Yeah, they're actually... I know that some people actually try to...
They pick like three people, three contrasting people, and every now and again ask themselves, what would each of these people think of this?
Three people they actually know.
And even if some people don't do it quite so systematically, probably we all of us have some sort of unconscious figure, that hazy figure that we conjured up who looks over our shoulder at some point.
And certainly in my case it's the latter, it's a kind of a hazy figure that I'm addressing.
But I am aware now that this figure has changed over time.
And I think when I wrote my first novel, it probably was a figure made up of just my friends, just a relatively limited circle of people.
I assumed they had the same kind of views that I did and had the same kind of
knowledge and just local knowledge and stuff that I did.
And when my first novel got published, I remember a certain kind of a worry or something that I finally pinned down to the fact that I suddenly realized that the book was going to be read by something wider than what the audience I had anticipated.
And there was a slight panic that these very different kinds of people had never dreamt of addressing were going to read it.
But then I kind of calmed down about that.
But what I then found was when I became more successful and I found myself having to promote my book in lots of different countries, this business of the reader looking over your shoulder, that started to get very complicated because when you go to somewhere like Italy or somewhere like that and you have to explain your book to Italians and then you come to America and you explain.
And in every country, there's a slightly different set of things that people focus in on.
They see your book in a slightly different way.
There's a number of recurring questions that occur in one country that's different to the recurring question of class in another.
Obviously, this is a reflection of what's going on in these places, to some extent.
But I find that when I sit down again in England and start to write, somewhere at the back of my mind, I've got it that what I write will be read by...
those people you know those people in Italy those people in Japan those people in America which kind of sometimes I think starts to affect what I write it must if you've been talking about telling somebody or explaining to somebody in Italy it must be kind of I don't know it's amusing of it your British subject with a Japanese surname
writing in English but being translated.
I've read also your first two novels where they were set in Japan or had Japanese.
You were regarded by many as an authority on Japanese culture and hadn't even been there since you were five years old.
And however much I told them that, they didn't want to hear it.
But people do expect you, probably.
They anoint you as an authority on something, don't they?
I know with my book, I recently was asked to do a review for The Washington Post.
They did it on eccentrics, because my book is about bibliomania.
The title was A Gentle Madness, so I must be an authority on eccentrics.
I love doing the review, and I told them.
But, you know, please give me some other ones.
I like other things.
Well, this is a problem.
This is probably how people in the media think.
Yeah, I mean, unless you're careful, yes, you just... It becomes self-perpetuating.
You do these reviews, and then that perpetuates this idea that...
You're an expert on all kinds of eccentricities, and then you get one about some others.
I've had a number of reviews for the New York Times.
I have a Greek surname.
I'm Greek-American.
I must have done four or five books in a row by Greeks, above Greece.
Right.
And I kind of think, you know, I was born in Massachusetts and educated Americans.
You know, I've really enjoyed American.
Well, that's very familiar.
I must say that is very familiar.
Do you find that?
Well, I spent a lot of time pushing this back.
I mean, early on in my career... Did you mindfully, then, was Remains of the Day more or less an effort?
It probably was.
I mean, the first round of pushing it back was just to say to all these people who asked me to do, you know, to review the latest kind of scholarly-style look on a Japanese painting or something like that, and then I couldn't do it.
I don't know where you read that thing but I was probably saying in whatever piece you read that I was asked to go on television to talk about the trade war between the United States and Japan on the national news and stuff like that I know nothing about business but all that mattered to them was that by this time a recently well known Japanese person living in London and it would have just
made an interesting kind of line-up.
It puts you in... I know the business.
I've worked with newspapers for a long time.
You have your set sources, people that you call.
If a story breaks on O.J.
Simpson, they'll call Alan Dershowitz.
For that quote, they can do a soundbite.
A plot.
I have the sense that plot was really a secondary concern to you as an artist.
Is that a fair assumption?
Well, my book characters and themes seem to be way higher in the end.
I guess I've never worked out if there is a way in which you can actually attend to all these things at once.
But in my experience, you can't prioritize them all.
I mean, there is something competing about them.
plot on the one hand and characters and themes on the other.
This is what I always find.
This could just be my own experience, but there is a kind of a conflict of interest with that.
But there are certain themes, however, that do energize you and that you are interested in.
Yeah, my books are all kind of led by theme and character.
I don't ask myself what
what should happen in my book.
So I tend to think about the themes and the characters and the plot is what I suppose what comes out when I'm trying to explore these themes.
Whereas I know that some writers would actually work out the plot first and then spend a lot of energy trying to make the characters kind of human.
You don't do that.
No, I can't get excited about plot as such.
Unless you're talking about plot in the most general sense, such as, you know, Butler gradually decides... If there's a story and where it's going, you more or less let the general concept of the characters... That always comes first for me.
Did you know with this new book that there were going to be four days?
I didn't exactly know precisely how many days when I started.
Did you know there was going to be a contraction?
Yes, I had in mind this kind of compression.
Was that a challenge for you?
Well, to have it just over a few days?
Right, yeah.
Not really, because I think that's always been my method, if you like.
Although my audiobooks always use flashbacks, so they appear to span a long time.
For some reason, I've had this habit, if you like, of actually having the present time base.
a relatively short period of time.
The remainder of the day takes place extensively over six days or whatever.
And he's just remembering back.
The method I was trying to use in The Unconsoled, and I think one of the reasons it's caused perhaps some confusion and difficulty in some quarters is because this
Well, here we get back to the initial question.
Either because the method I'm using here hasn't been picked up, or because I haven't used it with sufficient skill.
But it wasn't a dissimilar thing to the Remains of the Day.
I thought, I'll take a few days in somebody's life, a pivotal few days in somebody's life, during which time you will somehow learn about the whole of his life.
But, whereas in the Remains of the Day, what happened was that during these few days he had a lot of memories, and so the reader
gets filled out on his whole life here i thought i would try a different thing which i thought was interesting and exciting i thought why not have him just stumbled into a landscape and you wouldn't realize so much on flashback or memory but he would actually bump into various people in this landscape who to some extent exist in their own right but who he kind of appropriates his lives and stories he appropriates to tell his own story
So, yeah, the idea is that you're supposed to learn something about his childhood, about his adolescence, his relationship with his parents, his ambitions, and even his fears of what would happen in the future.
Through the stories of these other people he runs into, they are in some ways echoes of himself and the people important to him in his life.
although you don't learn literal facts you learn about the inner emotional facts so that's how it was supposed to work it's almost hence the dreamlike atmosphere and it's almost like a kind of dream where somebody might have the face of the hotel porter out there who i happen to have seen today but he's actually playing the role of somebody much more important in my drama and
it pops up in my head and it's kind of like that he's running into these relative strangers and they but he projects onto them um so i thought well this is this could be another way of just telling the story of somebody's life and how he feels about it an alternative to the flashbacks
and reassessment kind of method, which is a very conventional method.
Or indeed, an alternative to the straight chronological.
Probably not.
I mean, even the people who are very positive about the book only very tentatively posit these links between the characters
like Boris and, for instance, the character of Boris and Ryder as a child, they say there might be some echo or whatever.
And although this method, if you like, is one that, once it's kind of explained, I think it's a relatively simple method, far simpler than something like dramatic irony.
to appreciate.
It's just a dramatic irony that's been around for just years.
And even, you know, people who just read airport novels can pick it up very quickly if they come across it.
But, you see, I don't know, getting back to that question about how do I read the span of reviews, I mean, I don't know whether I should say, well, maybe I shouldn't do this altogether because people don't seem to pick it up, or whether
I should say, well, I should do it again but slightly differently in a way that makes it clearer, or if I should just say, well, I should just keep on doing it exactly as I'm doing it now and maybe people pick up on it.
This is an example of... It was necessary for us to have this question to be an artist.
Not absolutely necessary that he should be an artist.
He could have been a...
I did entertain the idea of having him as a kind of political messiah of some sort, coming into a place with a political crisis.
But then I thought, if I did that, I would end up writing something that was very literally a political novel.
Or even something that could be seen as a political allegory.
People are bound to start saying, oh, this is actually...
in a very literal sense, an allegory about Eastern Europe and the collapse of communism.
And you really didn't want that.
No, I didn't want that.
I thought that would get me back into this kind of Japanese situation.
Back on the news.
Yeah.
As a novelist, I've always been emphasizing I'm trying to deal with more kind of like universal
themes, human themes.
I don't profess to be an expert on a particular situation.
I'm not a commentator in that sense.
And so I decided instead to create a rather strange, absurd crisis.
There's a town full of people who think they've got the wrong musical values.
From that comes the theological thing.
If somebody is going to be the kind of messiah figure they all look to, then he should be some kind of musical virtue or so.
This may be a cliché question, but do these characters take on life?
Do they come alive for you when they're writing about them day after day and creating their lives and how they deal?
Do you know more about them than you have?
Do you have to know more of their histories?
Yeah, I think, well, I find it helps.
Yeah, I find that quite a lot.
And the danger, it's probably a danger I felt more in this kind of book, The Looser Structure, than I did in The Remains of the Day.
The danger is that you put in a lot of this extra stuff that you needed to get to know the character well, but...
the reader doesn't really need to know.
But if somebody were to ask you personal questions about them, you could answer them.
Yeah, well that's because I've often... There are pages that I've discarded that actually fit in a lot more about these people.
In fact, there are four characters that aren't there anymore.
The relatives of these people or whatever that aren't there anymore.
Tell me the same thing about the character that's not in the book.
Well there is a character I took out very late, at the late stage, who is the wife of the musician Kristoff, who is the one who's going to be handed out to town.
So that relationship, the Mrs. Kristoff thing was there in a slightly bigger way than it is now.
But I cut her out altogether.
The central character himself, though, tell me something about his history that you know that the reader either has to intuit or doesn't know.
Well, you see, the history... To put it very crudely, you can trace his...
biographically through the other characters, as I say, in the way that this method was supposed to work.
When he was a child, you know, he had a child that was rather like Boris's.
You know, when his parents are unhappy in some way, he cannot quite perceive because he's just a child.
But for some reason, he thinks maybe it's down to him to sort these things.
When he's a little older, he comes to believe Estefan
does if only he becomes a good enough pianist this will somehow make everything right in some kind of deep and profound sense between his parents and between himself and his parents interesting yesterday in this very hotel i didn't interview this um british woman just wrote a book about albert schweer oh yes
She maintains that the book is, and I think you write as much about Hitler as it is about Hitler.
The one great mystery that nobody knows anything about is Hitler's childhood.
If we could know what happened to his childhood, we might understand how evil a man is.
It's very interesting when we talk about the childhood, but we don't know about the childhood.
i throw that out for nothing in particular but it is it is an interesting uh yeah i mean i'm not i'm not a freudian though i don't have much type of psychotherapy but uh yeah i think that nevertheless i think there's probably there is a big link between what happens in childhood certainly environment you grow up in and what happens later on um
Well, I like Publishers Weekly calls it a post-modern nightmare.
You know, you have to comment on that.
I did an interview here about a week and a half ago at St.
Hattel, and Ann Beattie, another cobbler.
We were both reading your book at the same time.
And she, as I was just reading, looking at her, she said, it's Kafka.
To go back to the Kafka thing.
I was surprised that she didn't say that, too.
I don't think it's a ridiculous thing to say.
You know, I...
I mean, people like to... But it's an easy thing to say.
Yes, it's an easy thing to say.
But, you know, I'm not outraged by that.
It's just that I think it can be misleading, because I think... My reading of Kafka is that he does have clear themes that are quite away from... You do have continuing themes, though, don't you?
Yeah.
I mean, through the body of your work.
Is that a fair assessment?
Yes, I think so, yeah.
I think my themes tend to...
The emphases seem to probably change, inevitably, as I get older.
Now, you're 40?
Yeah, I'm 40 now.
I mean, really, your career is really ahead of you.
Do you agree with that?
Well, I don't know.
I mean, this is a depressing thing.
I think it's very dangerous for them.
I think there's something about being a novelist.
that it's perfectly easy to peak around your late 30s and early 40s.
Assuming you started in your 20s.
Yeah, you started.
And if you look at a lot of careers, I think you often see this career pattern with novelists.
Another interesting exercise is to take a lot of classic books, both this century and last century,
then to figure out how old the authors were when they wrote those books.
And I found this slightly alarming and surprising, because probably like a lot of people I have an image of great writers being kind of old, you tend to see these kind of grand portraits of them with big beards and stuff.
And of course the prestige of contemporary writers are often at their highest in their senior years.
But when you look back over the history of literature, I mean, often the classic books are actually written by very young writers.
You have to remember Kafka for a while.
I mean, he was dead by the time he was 40.
Yeah.
Yeah, so we're talking about books written at the 30s.
Like, War and Peace is written by a man in his mid-30s.
Well, let me tell you a cute story.
I was 52.
I remember on my 52nd birthday, by editor at Holt, in fact, I would ask you to describe the book for Alan Peacock.
He says, what are you so upset about?
What are you depressed about today?
I said, Alan, I'm 52 years old.
He said, but you weren't upset when you were 50.
I said, do you know who died on his 52nd birthday?
Shakespeare.
He died on April 23rd.
I said, I've already outlived Shakespeare, and my first book still isn't even out yet.
Ah, but that's a good sign.
That's a good sign, because if you start late, there's a different form for people who start late.
Dostoevsky, Conrad, people who actually...
These people, for one reason or another, started their writing late, their fiction writing, whatever else.
Well, he was rewriting his poetry, wasn't he, when he was way up there?
Of course, the rewrites, he should have left everything.
Well, poets and nonfiction writers, I think it works in a different way.
I think so.
Myself, and I am a nonfiction writer, happily, and it's what I like to do.
I think that what I'm doing now is something I couldn't have done ten years ago.
There really are elements of things that I have to understand about people and motivation.
It's different from... Yeah, I think it's something to do with a novelist.
A non-fiction writer, like Gita Sareni, is about 70, isn't she?
Well, whatever she was told,
Like a eunuch thing or whatever.
I don't think she's up there.
I could figure it out.
Maybe she's at 70.
She's in her 60s or something.
She's probably peaking now.
She's produced some pretty interesting books as far as I understand.
Child killers.
How do you like the arc of your career, having said this about...
expressing some anxiety about where... Well, the reason I'm saying this is that I think for novelists, you've got to really go for it when you're around my age.
I mean, this is a time to take risks, just, you know... Artistic risks?
Yeah, artistic... I mean, if you want to write a really good book, I mean, you have to start trying in earnest, you know, now.
And I think the part of the climate, the contemporary climate, is to say, is to suggest that, you know, if you're 35...
Even 40, you're still a relatively young novelist.
Because people like Saul Bellow and whoever, who are considered to be the very senior writers in prestige are also much older.
It gives the impression that the time to try the big books is when you're in your 60s or 70s.
This is a very dangerous thing.
This is why it's important to look at where the reputations have been built.
And they've been built often on the books that were written before the age of 42, 42.
I agree with that.
So I don't know what happens here, but in England you actually have prizes that encourage young writers, and in order to be eligible, you know, it often says under 35 or under 40 or something.
I think this is a very dangerous notion to this project.
Oh, that is not dangerous.
Yeah.
And I think some writers, I can see some writers of my age, of my generation, actually kind of wasting time.
They're treading water, or they're just not even doing their writing.
They're enjoying, you know, playing the writer, or whatever.
And maybe they imagine they're going to do their real work later on.
And this is the time, the time to kind of hang around in nightclubs and enjoy yourself in 10 years' time when you're
over the head anyway.
You are a painstaking worker, though.
This new novel took, what, four or five years to write?
Yeah, but I wasn't actually working on it all that time.
Part of the problem of the remains of the day was that I had to spend a lot of time promoting it.
I probably lost about two years of writing time doing that.
I wasn't able to settle down
property to thinking about a new life.
How long are you in the United States for?
Two and a half weeks.
I arrived about a week ago.
There's an interview of me on C-SPAN Sunday night.
There's a show called Book Notes.
It's on C-SPAN.
It's a one hour interview.
It's on my book.
Right.
Is that a television show?
It's a cable show.
It goes all over the country with it.
He largely interviews non-fiction.
It's based out of Washington.
I just mentioned it.
Well, I'll look out for that.
If you see it, it's a good book.
My book should have a lot of interest in England.
I hope I have a little bit of time to chapter.
I don't want to talk about my book at all.
So are you working on a book?
Yes I am.
I mean, part of my experience from having to do a lot of promotion after Remains of the Day was that, although it's not ideal, I've decided that I've just got to keep working, even if it's any scrappy bits of time, scrappy little windows of time between trips and stuff.
You can do that, though.
Yeah, I can do something useful.
There are some kinds of work I just cannot do in those circumstances.
I can still be doing some research or making notes or something, and I've decided this time I'll do that rather than say to myself, oh, it's impossible, I can't do anything.
I can't even start thinking about it until this all dies down and my final tour is over and
I think I kind of did that the last time because I wasn't quite ready for the amount of promotion I'd have to do.
Were you surprised by the reaction to this film?
I was surprised by the kind of the actual commercial success, if you like.
I mean, prior to this book, you had two books earlier in the United States, but they didn't settle at all well in the United States.
It's hard for non-American writers since
But when they do, they do very well.
We do love our British writers.
I believe that.
I never hesitate to want to do an interview when I have the opportunity.
Well, it's a strange relationship between the two literary cultures, because there are some very well-established writers here who are virtually out of print in Britain, who are not wrote at all.
she's an excellent writer and very respected here um you can only buy her in in uh import imported copies vintage um contemporary imported copies um in england it's amazing but she does write about americans though maybe uh russian there are plenty of people who are writing about this true
America or Lebanon.
She has been tabbed as the voice of her, I'm correct, like they call you, there's a Kafka book, a Kafkaesque book, where she very early in her career was anointed the literary voice of her generation, a disservice to her, I think, because it does kind of tag her in a way, doesn't it?
I see no reason why she shouldn't be very big in the event.
I mean, it's more to do with kind of...
more to do with publishing factors rather than cultural factors, I think.
I'm not quite sure what it is, but I just took her as an example, which you just mentioned, however, there are a lot of writers here, very firmly established, who are not really known at all in England, even if they're in print, and vice versa.
Some of our big contemporary authors
are probably very obscure here.
And so, certainly from the English point of view, it causes a great deal of frustration.
Because it's a great market.
Yeah.
And people, there is a sense, I suppose, even though they don't like to admit it, that you want to play the big games.
You've got to conquer the United States.
You haven't got an American readership.
You haven't quite made it great.
I think there is that feeling now.
I'm looking at my watch, it's five after ten, and I'm thinking about you right now, as long as I'd love to go on.
Maybe, would you inscribe a couple of books for me?
I really don't want you to be late.
What, the whole thing about... Well, you better not mention him by name.
I'll take care of it.
You go to this collector's house in Cornwall.
Yeah, he's got this kind of big, slightly spooky house in the middle of nowhere in Cornwall.
And in fact, a lot of writers I know received invitations and so on.
But one way or other, he tries to get you to come to his house.
and it sounds quite inviting he says he's got this beautiful house you can stay as long as he likes you he calls you or yeah he writes you yeah he writes you and he's persistent he's very persistent usually yeah but and he and you think it's tempting to think you know it might be quite fun i mean particularly in that area and you're going to stay in this place and he
Oh, he encloses photographs of his house, and he catches writers with his collection.
He's got this vast collection.
And once you're there, a vast collection?
Yeah, I know what happens is that once you're there, you very rapidly realize that you're being collected, too.
You sign a ledger, like a guest book, so to speak.
And you have to write a little thing.
It's not just a signature.
You write some little thing.
A little inscription kind of thing.
In this book.
And you flip back, and you realize that all these other writers have done the same.
Can you name a few writers after that?
I mean, I think immediately before John Le Carre, I think.
Really?
Just before Le Carre.
He lives quite nearby, yeah.
Oh, he's got a lot of writers, definitely.
But you also said that after about two hours?
Well, then he loses, well, after about two hours he doesn't really want you around.
I mean, he's not really hosting you.
He's just collecting you.
He kind of has had you, so to speak.
Yeah, that's why he wants you to go away.
It's kind of difficult.
You're in the middle of nowhere, master anywhere.
You're stuck in this house.
Read, if you can.
In fact, his back up takes thing about where he has the article out to visit one of his collectors.
I mention it in my book.